okay good morning everyone welcome back
I hope you had a good restful spring
recess um as promised for allowing me to
sneak away to England for a week before
spring RAC recess I brought back British
candies so grab a British candy and pass
it along there's no nuts in here we'll
start over
here there you go
okay all right so let's shake the rust
rust off our brains remember where we've
been where we are and where we're going
um if you can remember way back to
before spring recess we were working our
way through or we're starting to work
our way through the open challenges in
the field um my apologies I did not
manage to upload lecture 13 on
modularity uh I was caught up in
airports and had no Wi-Fi access and so
on so there was a quiz for the
modularity lecture if you took it great
if you didn't take it that's fine that
quiz will not be counted towards your
final grade I posted a little bit late I
think there was a typo in it so we're
all good yeah okay all right so uh in
this section on challenges as I
mentioned several times now the field of
evolutionary robotics is relatively
young uh obviously AI has made a lot
more progress than robotics there are
are a number of open problems about how
to create intelligent and autonomous
machines that no one has a good answer
for and my hope is that some of you may
continue on with this field and actually
find good and satisfying answers to some
of these open problems and start to
usher in new technologies in which we
have autonomous machines that load the
dishwasher and shovel snow and so on
until then uh we're going to spend the
next two weeks uh or so going through
some of these open problems to
understand what the problems are that's
the most important thing and then I will
give you a survey to what my colleagues
and I have come up with as the best
Solutions and as you will probably see
all of these Solutions are not very
satisfying there is clearly room for
improvement so that's what I want you to
keep an eye out for as we work our way
through the Section on open challenges
the field okay um before we dive back
into lecture as always just to get you
oriented in terms of where we are with
the assignments undergraduates you're
going to start T tackling assignment
nine uh this week in assignment n you
now have all of the basic pieces you
need in your robot your robot is made up
of a number of objects which in pull
that are called links you've connected
the links together with joints you've
instrumented your your robot with a
number of sensors and motors and you
spent the last two assignments
connecting sensors to motors with a
number of neurons and synapses so that
what the robot Senses at each time step
flows through to its motor neurons which
cause the robot to act which causes the
robots uh the robot's position and
orientation relative to its environment
to change changes sensor values changes
what it does next and around and around
we go in assignment 9 you're going to
start to create a series of increasingly
powerful search methods or evolutionary
algorithms that's going to search for
good sets of synaptic weights that cause
the robot to do the right thing at every
time step to respond to its current
sensation in order to walk forward jump
turn in a circle whatever it is you want
your robot to do so far so good any
questions about the assignments
yes what
is so this yeah exactly so W1 and so on
this stands for weekly reports so uh
when is it at the end of next week we're
all going to finish up with all the
assignments and you will then start in
on your final project and W1 your first
weekly report is something you're going
to submit to us on bright space telling
us what you plan to do for your final
project and we'll talk about final
projects uh next
week y okay grad students are those
taking this course for graduate credit
uh you are now tackling the
differentiable assignment number four in
which you're going to be adding Clos
Loop control to your robot and then next
week you'll tackle the fifth and final
differentiable assignment in which you
will uh differentiably optimize the
control of your robot any questions
about the differentiable
assignments no okay all right we're all
oriented okay so uh hopefully you did
watch the modularity lecture last time
when we evolve brains for robots what
tends the problem tends to be is that
the brains of the robots become
increasingly
nonmodular every sensor neuron tends to
influence every other hidden neuron
which means that when Evolution or any
Optimizer makes a change to just one
synapse in the neural controller for a
robot suddenly that has a global impact
on the behavior of the robot all of the
technology that we've created is modular
meaning that someone at least someone
who knows what they're doing can go in
and make a small change to one part of
the machine and that doesn't affect the
behavior of the machine as a whole how
to do that well for robotics nobody's
figured out how to do that yet so in
lecture
we looked at one attempt to force
Evolution or help Evolution to make
modular machines to make it so that
changes to one part of the brain of the
robot didn't affect its Global Behavior
yeah okay we're going to move on to
another problem today in lecture 14 to
which the solution is an algorithm
called neat so neat is the solution but
what is the problem that neat was
designed
uh to solve that problem is known as the
competing conventions problem and this
is a problem uh with neural networks in
general not just robotics okay so going
back to our discussion about neural
networks you'll remember that neural
networks regardless of whether they're
in a robot or not they're basically a
way of encoding a function it's a
function that transforms inputs into
outputs you might remember when we
talked about neural networks we coded up
a neural network that encoded a
particular function the or function then
we changed the synaptic weights of that
Network to encode a different function
which was the and function and then we
moved on to uh was it exclusive or
exclusive and exclusive or
right in that case we found that we
could not find synaptic weights for the
neural network so we had it to we had to
add in Hidden neurons which computed
subfunctions and then the values
arriving at those hidden neurons or
those subfunctions were comined at the
output to compute exclusive ore you
might remember that in that neural
network we had two hidden neurons one
that computed the and of its inputs and
one that computed its
or of its inputs and then the end if it
lit up would suppress the output of the
ore if you don't remember all the
details it's okay what's important for
us today is to remember that these
hidden neurons can compute sub functions
of the inputs and then at the final
output layer we can combine the results
of those subfunctions sound familiar
kind of make sense okay imagine if we're
evolving populations of neural networks
which is what you're going to be doing
by the time you get to the end of
assignment 9 you've got a population of
neural network
and you're applying a fitness function
to these neural networks you're trying
to evolve them to compute some function
imagine we are actually evolving these
neural networks to compute the exclusive
ore function you could imagine that in
that evolving
population some of these networks are
better or worse at evolving exclusive
Ora we're sort of partway through the
evolutionary process the neural networks
are getting better at exclusive ore but
they're not perfect yet inside each of
these neural networks in this evolving
population synaptic weights are evolving
so that maybe one of these networks is
getting pretty good at Computing or and
still not so good at Computing and
another one is pretty good at and but
not very good at or you got sort of the
beginnings of a good solution here in
most evolutionary algorithms one of the
things we do is at the end of each
generation
when we have some surviving neural
networks we take some of those survivors
and we copy them and we introduce
mutations we alter some of the synaptic
weights that's mutation some of the time
with the surviving neural networks we
take them and we try and sexually
recombine them we cut them in half and
try and glue the two halves of the
parents together to make new child
neural networks everybody remember that
from our discussion about genetic
algorithms okay so for evolving neural
networks kind of makes sense we're going
to do the same thing if this one happens
to be pretty good at exclusive ore we
copy it and introduce some mutations if
these two parent neural networks are
doing pretty well at exclusive ore let's
cut them in half take their two halves
and glue those two neural network halves
together to make a new child neural
network here comes the
problem in this cartoon example here
which which is going to illustrate this
problem of competing conventions we
obviously have neural networks that are
that have three hidden neurons not two
like in the case of exclusive ore so
forget exclusive ore for a moment let's
assume we're evolving these neural
networks to compute some function that
requires them to compute three
subfunctions a b and c so these networks
have to evolve sets of synaptic weights
so that they success compute internally
they compute A and B and C and we also
evolve the three synapses connecting the
hidden neurons to the one output neuron
so that it combines the results of these
three subfunctions in the right
way so far so good okay in this cartoon
example let's imagine that these two
neural networks are have evolved to be
pretty good each each of the two of them
have evolve to be pretty good at
Computing a b and c some one of them a
little bit better at a the other one a
little bit better at B doesn't really
matter so far so good okay now we're
going to cut them in half and glue their
two halves together in this uh this
little sort of notation down here we're
going to take ABC over here this neural
network and we're going to line it up
with c ba over here and let's imagine
that we cut here we're going to cut
we're going to separate the left two
neural the left two hidden neurons and
their synapses from the right hand
hidden neuron and we're going to cut
this neural network at exactly the same
place let's imagine we're just choosing
this cut point at random so we're
separating A and B from C in neural
network 1 and we're separating CB from a
in neural network
2 we've cut these two neural networks in
half so far so good okay how do we glue
them together we've got the left part of
parent one AB over here we're going to
glue it to the right hand side of
network two over here we're cutting
AB and we're combining it with a over
here now remember from our perspective
or The evolutionary algorithm it can't
see a b and c it's just sees a whole
tangle of synaptic weights the neural
The evolutionary algorithm is just
choosing a point at which to cut these
neural networks and glue them together
unbeknownst to The evolutionary
algorithm it's glued together it's
created this child network that commutes
computes A and B in its first two hidden
neurons and this child computes a
again in its third hidden
neuron what do you think the fitness of
this child is going to
be it's no good right it's missing C and
it's got two copies of a that's no
good with the same two cut with the same
cut we can create a second child where
we take the the left hand two hidden
Neons from parent 2 and glue the right
hand side of parent one on to produce a
second child that internally computes CB
and C everybody see that how well does
that child
do okay so that didn't work very well
again from The evolutionary algorithm's
perspective it just tried something by
chance and produced two children that
had lower Fitness than the two parents
let's try
again maybe we cut here and here what
happens in this
case we separate the left hidden neuron
in both parents from the two right hand
hidden neurons in both parents and glue
those halves together what
happens same thing there is no good way
to cut these neural networks together to
glue them together yeah
this is particularly tragic if for
example this parent happens to be doing
really well at A and B it's just not
doing so well at C yet it's kind of
evolved to figure out two of the three
sub problems and imagine that this
parent this parent over here has
happened to evolve to be really good at
sea but it's really it's still not doing
so great at A and B right what a lost
opportunity it would be fantastic to
take the good A and B from parent one
and glue it onto the good C from parent
to this is part of the reason why sex
evolved in nature there's lots of
reasons why sex evolved in nature one of
the most obvious reasons is if you can
combine genetic material from two
parents and you happen to bring together
The Best of Both Worlds you can produce
a child that is better than both parents
question
does this problem is is this applicable
to just like kind of generally trying to
cross nor works or is it like somehow
rying on the fact that there's like a
symmetry yeah it's it's a problem in
general this little cartoon is an
oversimplification of the problem in
general this is just meant to help you
illustrate and understand what the
problem is we can imagine neural
networks that are bigger have different
cognitive architectures different
subfunctions this problem arises quite
quite a bit in that basically it's very
difficult to cut neural networks and
glue them together and have any hope
that you're going to bring together The
Best of Both
Worlds this problem is made more
difficult by the fact that populations
of neural networks that are evolving
tend to have competing conventions what
is that mean both of these parents we
can assume have relatively High Fitness
but nothing says that the neural
networks need to compute subfunction a
in Hidden neuron number one right each
each neural network might be pretty good
but it might internally encode or it
might internally evolve a convention
where a is computed over here and B is
computed over here and C is computed
over here and then in another neural
network a is here B is here C is here so
we can't even rely on the fact that the
same subfunctions are being computed in
the same place in the neural networks
this makes things even more difficult
Emily does this a challenge for
something like scaffolding where maybe
you're not necessarily expecting a way
that something Lear a first
beh it it can be related to scaffolding
yes so if you scaffold a learner and it
starts to learn the problem problem and
you make assumptions about how it's
encoding its partial solution to the
simplified problem then your scaffold
might not work yes there is a connection
here not relevant for our discussion
today but yes there is a
connection okay everybody see the
competing conventions problem okay so if
we want to try and evolve populations of
neural networks and if part if some of
the neural networks start to solve some
part parts of the problem and we want to
bring this together we want to make it
easier for The evolutionary algorithm to
bring together good subfunctions from
different neural networks how do we do
it the neat algorithm was evolved to
solve this problem we're going to go
through this solution now neat for
evolving neural networks through
augmenting topologies they kind of
shoehorn their acronym in here but of
course it's kind of you want to have a
neat
uh acronym right okay okay so how does
this work actually before I go into the
details let me give you the
intuition they're going the neat
algorithm is actually very popular it's
still used today it was published over
20 years ago it's still a very popular
way to evolve neural networks for the
following reason neat is able to
identify or make a good guess for where
certain subfunctions are in the neural
networks so if you asked neat where is C
inside these neural networks it would
actually be able to tell you C is over
here in network one and it's over here
in network 2 how can neat know this this
is neat was designed to do exactly this
yeah question did you say that neat was
evolved neat is is an evolutionary
algorithm it's a type of evolutionary
algorithm designed to evolve neural
networks and it's going to evolve them
not not just evolve them it's going to
evolve them in such a way that it can
track where different subfunctions are
being computed in every neural network
in the evolving population and line
things up so that when we cut these
networks we don't end up with stuff like
this we always end up with children that
have one copy of everything that you
need a b and c that's the intuition
everybody get the intuition I haven't
told you how it does it yet but we'll
see that in a
moment
okay okay here we go so remember that in
every evolutionary algorithm we need to
identify what is the genotype and what
is the phenotype we've seen a few
different uh evolutionary algorithms now
that use different data structures to
encode their genotypes here's another
evolutionary algorithm neat that has a
different data structure for encoding
the
genotype every
genotype in neat is evolved as a pair of
lists of arbitrary length these are not
going to be fixed length lists we'll see
this in a moment so if we have a
population of genotypes or genomes in
neat we have a population of list pairs
so far so good okay what is the
phenotype we're going to translate we're
going to map or transform this genotype
as represented by this big Arrow here
into the phenotype the thing that we're
going to evaluate and the thing that
we're going to assign a fitness value
too what is the phenotype in neat it's a
neural
network we're going to take this
genotype it's going to tell us how to
construct a neural network we then
Supply inputs to the neural network and
observe the outputs and assign some
Fitness to how well this neural network
performs phenotypes that get high
Fitness their genotypes survive into the
Next Generation neural networks or
phenotypes that do poorly that get low
Fitness values their genotypes are
deleted and replaced with others and so
on yeah so all else being equal a
relatively familiar evolutionary
algorithm the novelty here is in how
neat encodes neural networks okay here
we go remember that a neural network is
made up of a series of neurons
represented by nodes here and by
synapses links that connect pairs of
nodes or neurons together so in an
individual genotype we're going to have
a list dedicated to nodes or neurons and
we're going to have a second list which
is dedicated to the
synapsis each element in the first list
describes a single neuron to be to be
constructed into the neural network so
in this cartoon example here you see
this genotype had encodes five different
neurons and there is an integer
label assign within each element of the
list and that integer indicates what
type of neuron that neuron is yeah so an
integer of zero could say that this is a
sensor neuron an integer of one could
say that this neuron is a hidden neuron
and an integer of two indicates that the
neuron is a motor or output
neuron so far so good okay so you can
see that we've got five uh neurons here
so when we start to turn this genotype
into a phenotype we we read from left to
right along this list of neurons and we
drop a neuron into our empty neural
network here we start constructing this
neural network we drop one two three one
two three sensor neurons then we drop a
hidden neuron in here and then we drop
an output neuron here at this point
forget all these black lines and arrows
in here these are just disconnected
neurons nothing's connected to anything
else yet so far so
good remember that the genotype is the
thing that we mutate and we're going to
also sexually recombine these genotypes
in a moment what happens if a mutation
hits by chance node number three here
the third element in the list and flips
this integer from zero to one sensor to
Hidden what happens to the
phenotype
we've mutated the genotype what's
changed in the
phenotype there's one
Lut so then there's like another hidden
neuron in the middle that's right we've
got one two we've got one two sensor
neurons and two hidden neurons and one
output neuron we haven't wired them up
yet we haven't supplied any inputs and
observed any outputs so the labels have
changed on the these five neurons but
nothing else yet yeah so as we go we're
kind of mentally simulating this
evolutionary algorithm what happens if
we mutate this what happens if we let's
imagine another mutation hits this
genotype that adds a new random element
to the end of this
list what happens to the
phenotype it doesn't change if you don't
have
as well well we've added an element out
here we we haven't even talked about the
synapses yet what's happened to the
phenotype down here if you had to draw a
picture of this new list with six
elements in it just add the new yellow
circle just add a new yellow circle
right we've got a sixth disconnected
neuron yes sorry this is going back to
something you said earlier I I just sort
of got confused you said there was two
hidden neurons I get why four is hidden
and then you point it to three is oh I'm
sorry okay so this genotype here it says
build your neural network from five
neurons and label three of them as
sensor neurons these three down here and
label the fourth one as hidden and label
the fifth one as output now to try and
just build an intuition for this
genotype and phenotype so far we haven't
talked about synapses yet to build an
intuition
I said imagine we take this genotype we
copy it and we introduce a mutation into
the copy and the mutation just happens
to hit this third node in the copied
list and it flips the label here from
sensor to Hidden the point is that if
you then construct a phenotype from that
from that mutated list it would look the
same you'd have five yellow circles it
would just be that two of them have the
sensor label attached to them two of
them have the hidden label attached to
them and the fifth one still has the
output label attached to them so far so
good question um this this is also going
back to what you said ear um so when
you're talking about like kind of the
idea of like sub functions um are is it
generally like the hidden nodes that are
responsible for sub
functions yes it's the it's the hidden
neurons that are responsible for
subfunctions neural network is a
function it Maps inputs onto
outputs and when we take the inputs and
we compute the values of the Hidden
neurons we have floating Point values
sitting inside these hidden neurons we
can view that as a mapping itself we had
floating we had numbers at the input
layer now we have numbers at the hidden
layer that's a mapping and we can view
each of those numbers sitting inside
those hidden neurons as sub
functions so far so good okay okay the
second list as you can probably figure
out here um is a list that specifies how
to wire the neurons together each
element in this list specifies a
synapse you can see in this cartoon
example there are six uh there are six
elements in this list and there are one
2 3 four five
synapses one of the synapses in the
genotype has been disabled this is
something we haven't seen yet in an
evolutionary algorithm this is something
that exists within our genetics within
our DNA certain mutations can occur
inside uh genomes natural ones and
artificial ones that disable them
they're sitting there in the DNA but
they don't code for anything they're
turned off
so the genome has information about six
synapses but one of those uh synapses or
one one of the descriptions of a
potential synapse has been
disabled so far so good okay so we're
now going to walk from left to right
along this list of synapses and I I
don't like the uh the terminology for
neat this is connection genes connection
meaning a connection between PA pairs of
of uh neurons just think of this as the
sensor list H sorry the neuron list and
this is the synapse list okay so we
visit the first element and we see
there's two integers which are indices
to
neurons if you've made your way through
assignment 8 you've seen this already
the way we specify a synapse is to
indicate who it connects together so
we're going to add as we walk from left
to right we're going to keep building
out our neural network we're going to
keep constructing it this first synapse
is supposed to connect neuron one to
neuron 4 here's neuron one here's neuron
four so we connect neuron one and four
together the third number inside this
element is 0.7 a floating point value
which is the weight of that
synapse there is a binary flag inside
each element which indicates whether
this synapse is enabled or disabled it's
enabled so we add it to the neural
network there is a fifth and final
number inside the description of each
synapse called The Innovation number
this is the thing that's new about neat
but we're going to come back to the
Innovation number in a moment so forget
about Innovation numbers for a
moment we go to the next element in the
list which tells us how to add a second
synapse the second synapse should
connect neuron 2 to four so we do so we
assign a weight of 0.5 to that synapse
we go to the next uh synapse we see that
this one is disabled so we skip over
this one we don't add anything to the
phenotype we wire up neuron 3 to neuron
5 aign a weight of 0. 2 go here attach
neuron 4 to five assign a weight of 0.4
and now we attach five to four and
assign a weight of
0.6 why is this synapse colored purple
it's a special kind of synapse that
we've seen
before recurrent it's a recurrent neural
network yeah okay all right so we've now
walked our way along the genotype and by
doing so the genotype is basically a
blueprint it's told us how to construct
a neural network and we get this neural
network so far so good okay let's build
up our intuition a little bit about this
second part of the genotype what happens
if this genotype survives into the Next
Generation and it produces an offspring
we copy all of this genetic information
and when we copy it we introduce a
random mutation and the random mutation
happens to hit this element and it
happens to hit by chance this weight and
changes this weight from 0.4 to 0.7 what
changes in the
phenotype for that
Offspring
anything this we've hit we've mutated
the synapse that connects neuron four to
five this synapse here we've changed its
weight from 0.2 to
0.7 everybody see that we've changed the
phenotype of that child that's probably
going to have an impact on how the child
behaves how the child transforms its
inputs to
outputs so far so good okay imagine a
second child same thing we take this
parent we copy it and uh that child
suffers a random mutation which also
happens to hit this element by chance
let's say but in this case we
hit uh we hit this integer and this
integer changes from five to
three how does the phenotype of that
child differ from its
parent four to are not connected anymore
now it's four th this connection has
been broken this this synapse which in
the parent connects four to 5 the
synapse now connects 4 to3 we've made a
change to to the cognitive architecture
of the
child question is is it like legal to
have two synapses between two noes or do
they get merged is it legal to have two
synapses in neat it's legal because as
you can see these synapses start to move
around or Evolution can move them around
it's perfectly fine exists in your
brains as well you have multiple
synapses from certain neurons to certain
other ones whether that's a good thing
or a bad thing who knows okay so a lot
of new you're going to see a lot of new
things in the neat algorithm that we
haven't really seen before the first
thing to notice is that neat is not just
evolving the weights of a fixed neural
network neat is altering not just the
synaptic weights but also altering the
cognitive architecture of this of the
neural networks if you imagine a whole
population of neural networks in uh in a
neat population and they have different
genotypes some of those neural networks
in the population might have more
neurons or less neurons some might have
more hidden neurons or less hidden
neurons some are going to be wired up
more densely some are going to be wired
up more
sparsely Evolution can decide on the
cognitive architecture of these neural
networks so far so good okay last thing
I want to show you let's go back to this
parent again let's imagine this parent
produces a third child so we take all of
this genetic information copy it to
create the child genotype and now a
mutation hits this element and it
changes this weight what effect does
that have on the phenotype of the
child nothing nothing this also happens
to you if you happen to have some
children and you pass on your genetic
information into your Offspring there
may be a mutation that occurs in your
genetic material as it's being passed
into your Offspring but if that those
mutations happen to hit genes in your
genome that are turned off no obvious
impact on your child whatsoever yeah it
exists in nature okay so let's go back
to the name of the algorithm uh this is
neuroevolution of augment topologies the
neat algorithm so we can see that this
is an evolutionary algorithm and we're
evolving neural networks so this
algorithm actually ushered in this new
term neuro Evolution which is just short
for here's a way to evolve neural
networks topologies the
topology uh refers to the cognitive
topology or the cognitive architecture
how many or how few neurons are there
and how are they wired up neural
topology and neural architecture mean
exactly the same thing what do they mean
by augmenting
topologies like shifting them around
versus just changing their
weights as Evolution proceeds mutation
might add neurons or add synapses to
children and grandchildren and
great-grandchildren over evolutionary
time evolution is augmenting the Topo
cognitive topologies of these ancestral
neural
networks so far so good okay Cam you
help me understand the relationship of
just to the body like the number of
input neurons and output neurons exactly
so we correspond with sensors and Motors
yes we've Stripped Away we've Stripped
Away the robot for a moment what happens
if the robot has three sensors
but a particular genotype causes the
construction of a neural network with
only two input neurons we got three
sensors and two input neurons how do we
connect these things together it's not
so obvious we're not going to worry
about that for now we're just focusing
on evolving neural neural networks we'll
put these neural networks back into
robots in a few minutes when it comes to
the whole like it can add new neurons is
it it is the algorithm still limited to
only enabling or disabling ones that are
like preset by people creating or can it
just like add another item
to a mutation could add a new synapse
and disable it a mutation could delete a
synapse and then it could delete another
synapse and it could add add remove
modify
everything so in the neat algorithm
there are many many more mutation
operators than you're used to if you've
gotten as far as code assignment 9 and
started to code up an evolutionary
algorithm all of the evolutionary
algorithms you've been coding up so far
have one and only one type of mutation
operator pick a synapse at random and
change its weight that's the only
operation that your mut your
evolutionary algorithm can inflict on a
genome in neat there are many more
mutation operators add a neuron delete a
neuron mutate a neuron add a synapse
remove a synapse modify a
synapse everybody see that okay so
hopefully what I what you have in your
head now you can mentally simulate the
neat algorithm we start in generation
Zero by constructing n of the uh n
random versions of this data structure
to create our n neural network random
neural networks in the population at
generation zero yeah in that initial
population we now have n neural networks
which have more or fewer neurons
different ways of wiring themselves up
they're dense they're sparse they all
have different cognitive architectures
and different synaptic
weights I haven't talked about how we
evaluate these yet but let's assume you
evaluate them and you're able to assign
a fitness value to every neural network
in the population we delete the ones
that have low Fitness and we make
randomly modified copies of the
surviving neural networks repeat repeat
repeat repeat everybody see that it
could be if it's useful for whatever
problem we're evolving these neural
networks to solve if if it's a
complicated mapping or it's a
complicated function of transforming
inputs to outputs you would expect to
see that over evolutionary time these
neural networks evolve to become bigger
and bigger and bigger with more and more
internal hidden neurons so that these
neural networks get better and better
and better at approximating this
complicated mapping from inputs to
outputs if we evolve these neural
networks to solve the or problem two
inputs one output the or problem they
would probably evolve to get smaller and
smaller they only need two inputs and
one out outputs they don't need a lot of
neural Machinery to solve the
problem all of the interesting problems
that we want to solve an open AI is
trying to solve and everybody's trying
to solve an AI we don't know how big or
how small or how to wire up these neural
networks open AI solution is make it as
big as humanly possible train it forever
and hope for the best clearly that's
kind of working but maybe we can do
better yeah
this is an attempt to try and do that
let Evolution figure out what the right
size and shape of the neural network
should be for whatever the problem is
you want that neural network to solve so
far so
good okay so far we've been talking
about just mutations inside the neat
algorithm now let's talk about what neat
was really designed to do which is to
solve the competing conventions problem
here we
go uh oh I'm sorry no this is still on
uh this is still on mutation but we're
going to we're going to talk now about
the this Innovation number so if you
just look at the cartoon down here if we
just look at this parent phenotype this
parent phenotype has uh made a copy of
itself and that copy has suffered a
mutation which has added uh has added a
synapse here that connects neuron
through three to neuron 4 you'll notice
here that this new synapse has appeared
on the end of this list so the mutation
that occurred to the the mutation
suffered by this child was a ad synapse
mutation okay so they uh We've in this
little cartoon here they've simplified
things they are not drawing the neuron
list they are only drawing the synapse
list this parent has one two 2 3 4 1 2 3
4 synapses one disabled synapse the
child has 1 2 3 four sorry 1 2 3 4 five
synapses 1 2 3 4 five synapses and this
disabled
synapse everybody see that inside the
synapse list they put this little
notation here so you can see what's
wired up to what they're not writing out
the weight or disabled or enabled I'm
trying to simplify things you'll notice
that there are some integers that are
Marching along the top here these are
the Innovation numbers The Innovation
numbers are
integers every single synapse and every
single neuron in every neural network in
a neat population has an innovation
number assigned to it this is like the
social security number everyone has one
okay how is this Innovation number
assigned there is a global counter
inside the evolutionary algorithm by
global counter I mean it's the
evolutionary algorithm that's counting
not the neural
networks This Global counter every time
a new every time a mutation adds a
synapse to any neural network neat takes
the current value of the global counter
which in this cartoon example here
happens to be seven and it assigns that
number to that new thing that new
synapse or that new uh neuron and then
neat click updates the global counter
now the global counter is sitting at
eight if some other neural network uh if
some other neural network for example
suffers a mutation that adds a node here
you'll notice in this parent there is no
neuron six here we've got neuron six
it's added a global counter or the
global counter has been added to the
neuron question any reason it's missing
two sorry is there any reason it's
missing two uh yes there is a reason
okay so let's go back to generation zero
let's assume we're right at the
beginning of the neat algorithm we just
started we haven't even made any
genotypes yet any phenotypes the global
counter is at zero algorithm wakes up
and starts creating uh starts to create
a random genotype let's imagine it
creates this random genotype it adds by
chance five neurons click click click
click click we take well it should
really be Z zero let's start the global
counter at one the first the very first
neuron that's added to the very first
genotype in the first generation gets a
Innovation number of one next one it
adds it adds a second neuron it adds a
global counter of two three four
five uh and then it keeps going the
numbers here actually don't make sense
but we can imagine if we add uh we add a
random synapse where the global counter
is at six this should be 6 7 8 9 10 11
we're adding a whole bunch of random
stuff into the genotypes of this initial
random population and we're assigning
the global counter as we go so far so
good so in this initial random
population we got a whole bunch of
synapses and neurons everybody has a
unique number everybody has a every
neuron and synapse has a unique Social
Security number so far so good do you
toast we might have to add constraints
depending on what the problem is that
we're going to expose these neuron
networks too yes now the question is the
standing question is why is innovation
number two missing from this list I'm
going to come back to your question in a
moment is there another question about
clarification no this is going to wager
why it's not there but if you're go
ahead and wager why it's not there can
it delete synapsis it can delete
synapsis maybe maybe the let's say well
I guess it would be the first neural
network had an innovation number of two
and it died it it had a low Fitness at
the end of generation one never made it
into the Next Generation so that social
security number is gone from the
population it's not there
anymore
um when these like random mutations are
happening is is it like a uniform kind
of like distri distribution of what
happens because like for example you
were talking about like if there's a
Network that has to solve a big problem
like could it just never really reach a
big size CU it's just constantly like
adding and deleting kind of remaining
it's a great question so yes to your
first question there is a uniform
distribution of what mutations are
inflicted on a child when a child is
produced so for our purposes it's easy
to think of six different mutation
operators add remove or modify a neuron
add remove modify a
synapse when we take a
parent and copy it into the child
imagine we actually roll a dice with six
numbers whichever whichever number comes
up that's the operation we
apply six different mutation operators
applied with uniform probability your
second observation was that well if the
problem is complicated we need a big
neural network but the neural networks
are suffering add remove modify
mutations over evolutionary time with
equal probability how can the neural
netor Works get bigger they can get
bigger and they do get bigger why how
can that
happen the bigger ones perform better
the bigger ones perform better right
Charles Darwin started to realize this a
long time ago even if what's going on
inside he didn't know anything about
genes but if what was going on inside
was just random change it doesn't matter
selection will bias things kind of
reduces Randomness right things start to
move towards bigger and bigger neural
networks or towards smaller and smaller
networks or towards denser and denser
networks or to whatever it is that's
useful Evolution should be able to
figure it
out so far so good okay all right so
every time a mutation adds something we
take the value of This Global counter
and assign it to that new thing that new
thing gets it's a unique social security
number if you look at the The Innovation
numbers in this parent and then the
Innovation numbers in its child you'll
notice that my metaphor of the social
security number is now breaking down the
first neuron in the child has the same
Innovation number as the first neuron in
the
parent when we copy neural material from
a par par into a child we do not assign
a new Global counter that new piece that
new neuron or new synapse in the child
that it's inheriting from its parent the
child inherits that Innovation
number so far so good okay so you'll
notice this child has one synapse that
has an innovation number different from
its
parent okay okay so why are we doing
this this mutation number and This
Global counter seems like an odd thing
what is it designed to
do here we go oh question yeah when you
like move from a parent to a child do
you not reset the Innovation counter the
global counter is never reset by
definition it's always every time we
assign we assign the number seven to
this new neuron we update the global
counter to eight and then we just wait
until the next mutation comes along that
adds something a neur a new neuron or
new synapse and we assign a value of
eight to that thing so the go counter is
like outside of parent child it's
outside of parent children neural
networks it's inside the evolutionary
algorithm it's a ticker and it's adding
or it's tagging stuff with numbers as
Evolution proceeds from neural network
to neural network to generation to
generation children grandchildren
great-grandchildren one and only one
Global
counter so far so
good okay some of you may start to in it
what this is for let's see if you're
right okay here we go we're going to now
introduce the last piece of the neat
algorithm which is sex we're going to
now cut two parent neural networks apart
and glue their parts together and hope
that the resulting
child looks and acts something like its
parent if I grab your uh Apple laptop
and cut it in half and I grab somebody
else's PC and cut it in half and glue
those two halves
together it's super hard to do this it's
hard to take optimized machines whether
they're literal machines or neural
networks that have different internal
configurations and glue glue them
together and hope that you get the best
of both worlds in theory there should be
a way to combine parts from an apple and
parts from a PC to actually get the
benefits of what's done better in those
two machines super super hard to do for
legal reasons but also for technical
Reasons I'm just trying to impress upon
you about how hard this problem actually
is and neat is very famous very popular
well used because it does a pretty good
job of solving this problem not perfect
there is probably a better way to do
this but in the last 22 years no one has
come up with a better way to do this
okay here's how it does this we've got
parent one over here which is made up of
five neurons and 1 2 3 four
synapses parent two has a different
cognitive
architecture we've we've got 1 2 3 four
five six neurons and one 1 2 3 four five
synapses this is even harder than the
cartoon example back here at least in
this cartoon example both parents had
the same cognitive architecture they had
different sets of synaptic weights and
different internal
conventions this is even harder they
probably got different internal
conventions and different cognitive
architectures how are we going to
interbreed these two very different
animals okay
here is part of the genotype for this
parent and here's the genotype for part
of this parent again in this cartoon uh
in this illustration we're not showing
the neuron list only the synapse list
you know this is the synapse list
because you can see connect neuron 1 to
four Connect neuron 2 to four and so on
so far so good okay you'll notice that
this parent and this parent
share some of the same Innovation
numbers this is not a social security
number some of the stuff inside of
parent one and some of the stuff inside
of parent two has the same Innovation
number how is this
possible they had a common ancestor they
had a common ancestor so this particular
let's take synapse 2 here the second
synapse here in parent one one it's the
synapse that connects 2 to four and over
here in parent 2 it also H this that
synapse with the same inovation number
happens to connect neuron 2 to four in
that parent as well they probably these
two parents are probably the children of
a common parent or the cousins of a
common grandparent or the second cousins
of a common great grandparent whatever
it is they probably had a common
ancestor and in that common ancestor
that common ancestor probably had a
synapse that connect connected its
neuron 2 to its neuron 4 and that
synapse in the common ancestor had an
innovation number of two is it pretty
likely that things with the same
Innovation number kind of are
responsible for the
same like that's not a guarantee right
it's not a guarantee but what you just
said is the key to the neat algorithm
the Assumption here is that whatever
synapse 2 did in the common ancestor
whatever subfunction it helped to
compute whatever job it was doing inside
that ancestral neural network it's
probably doing a similar job maybe not
an identical job in this neural network
and in this neural
network Emily this inspired by sequence
alignment
AB absolutely so in you you are
obviously The Offspring of two parents
your two parents had slightly different
genetics how did how did uh how did
conception and integration of sperm and
egg how did that mechanism know how to
make sure not to put too much of one
gene into you and not and no copy of the
gene that regulates heart rate for
example if you don't inherit a gene that
regulates heart rate you are in a lot of
trouble yeah so there is a lot of
complex uh orchestration that goes on uh
during meiosis and then mitosis that
aligns sequences to make sure that you
get at least one copy of everything you
need that inspired the neat algorithm
here everybody see that
intuition okay they're going to then
exploit or trust the fact that things
with the same Innovation number in the
two parents do the same thing to guide
recombination we're going to recombine
these two bits of DNA these two
genotypes we're going to start uh with
parent one we're going to take the first
element of parent one and place it here
for the moment and we're then going to
align sequences like Emily just said
we're going to go to parent two and
we're going to ask parent 2 hey do you
have any neural material that has an
innovation number of one also I just
placed uh a piece of parent one and that
piece of parent one had an innovation
number of one is there anything else in
parent two that is analogous that has
the same Innovation number parent 2 says
yes yes I have one piece here it's this
piece so the recombination operator in
the neat algorithm takes this piece of
genetics from parent one and places it
underneath uh from parent two and places
it underneath the same piece from parent
one it's aligned these two pieces of
their two genomes so far so good okay
the recombination operator then steps to
the next piece of parent one puts that
here looks in parent two to see if there
is something that has also an innovation
number of two and places it underneath
yeah we keep sort of walking from left
to right in both
parents we get to this point here uh and
there is a gap here so there is a piece
of parent two that has an innovation
number of three but there is no piece in
parent one that has an analogous piece
of genetic material there's nothing that
has an innovation number of three so we
leave a gap in parent
one uh we line up these two
pieces this piece uh there is a piece
with an innovation number of five in
parent one no piece that has an
innovation number of five in parent two
and we keep going so we've taken all the
genetic material from parent one and
parent two and sort of spaced out all of
that material so everything is lined up
and now we're ready to create an
offspring we're going to start copying
genetic material from both both parents
into the child how do we do it we've
done the hard part now it's
easy for each of the ones that isn't
disjoint just pick one we're going to
walk from left to right along this align
these two aligned lists and if there are
two copies of the same piece of genetic
material we don't need both copies we
just need one flip a coin heads copy
parent ones copy Tails copy parent twos
copy Into The Offspring if we get to a
disjoint uh piece we can copy the
disjoint piece in or we can just leave
it empty doesn't doesn't really
matter everybody get it okay we now have
this particular genotype for the child
again we're not showing the neuron list
we do exactly the same thing with the
neuron list in this illustration we're
just showing how we recombine the two
synapse lists and we get this list of
synapses in the child and you can bounce
your eyes back and forth between this
genotype and this phenotype and you
should be able to see that the child's
cognitive architecture is different from
both of its parents cognitive
architectures but similar there's a
family
resemblance question so there's no way
to
remove uh
it's yeah it's a good point I I think
you know what I I think it's not
mentioned in the paper but I I'm pretty
sure that sometimes you just skip over
one of these things it wouldn't make
sense to always be adding material you
could do that recombination could always
like make the child a little bit bigger
and denser than the parents and neat
could rely on mutation to pair away or
delete stuff that's not used but I would
guess that they probably also doing the
same thing in the recombination
operation good good
observation okay how does this help with
the competing conventions
problem absolutely so going back to this
example imagine that these two parents
have a common ancestor and in that
common ancestor that common an Anor
let's say uh computed a but did a crappy
job of computing a it did kind of okay
but whatever it was those three red
synapses whatever they were that helped
compute subfunction a they had three
Innovation numbers with them you would
expect that these three synapses in
parent one have those three Innovation
numbers and those three Innovation
numbers appear here in par too so neat
would know to not put two copies of this
stuff into the child it would take one
and only one piece of these three red
synapses that's how neat solves the
competing conventions
problem okay uh I just I just said all
this line up the connection genes or the
synapse list according to their
historical markers sometimes when people
talk about neat they refer to this as
The Innovation number sometimes they
refer to it as the historical marker I
like historical marker because that
defines exactly what this number is for
yeah okay so disjoint genes those in the
middle that don't have a partner maybe
we copy them in maybe we don't we can
also have excess genes in one parent
compared to another mix and match but
we're ensuring that we only bring across
one and only one copy of what we
need okay that concludes our discussion
of the neat algorithm I would love to
tell you everything I can about the neat
algorithm and all the amazing
applications it's been applied to we
don't have time in this course to do it
so we're going to move on
to another algorithm called hypernet and
as the name implies it's the SQL
algorithm to neat it's going to take
neat and add some stuff that makes it
really useful for
robotics so for now you're going to just
have to take my word for it you can
actually try it out cating up meat isn't
that difficult it's a really good way to
evolve populations of neural networks to
do whatever you want them to do if we
want to then take these neural networks
and put them back into uh robots uh we
need to do some extra stuff and we've
got eight minutes left so we're just
going to start in on the hypernet
algorithm okay this is a uh this is a
little bit of a complicated algorithm to
go through as the name implies we've got
neat going on here so in hyper neet
we're going to evolve populations of
neural networks here we go here's a
neural network here okay so we're going
to use neat to mutate and sexually Rec
combine neural networks in the hyperneat
algorithm these neural networks look a
little bit differently than neural
networks we've seen so far we've seen a
couple of different neural networks so
far we've seen uh we've seen
ctrnn continuous time recurrent neural
networks that were designed to allow
continuous change to neurons we're now
going to see a different type of neural
networks which are called cppns my
apologies for all the
acronyms cppn stands for compositional
pattern producing networks which is a
mouthful we're going to spend the next
few minutes and into next lecture
unpacking each of these terms as we
go okay here is a neural network over
here it's a
cppn it's a neural network we've got no
we've got neurons like we've seen before
this particular cppn has one two input
neurons one two three hidden neurons and
one output neuron and it's got a whole
bunch of synapses that connect these
neurons together so despite the
alienness of cppn that we're going to
see in a moment remember they're just
neural networks neurons and synapses
which means we can use hypernet to
evolve them to do
stuff okay what are cppn designed to do
they're designed to paint regular
patterns the phenotype of a cppn is a
pattern that is painted in
space we just talked about neural
networks as being
phenotypes now we're talking talking
about neural networks which are
phenotypes and these neural networks
paint a pattern which is a phenotype
it's kind of confusing I see some of you
writing with pen onto paper your Form
and Function is phenotype you're doing
something you're affecting the world and
you're creating something that is also
considered sometimes part of your
phenotype it's often referred to in
biology as the extended
phenotype your genes cause all this to
happen the phenotype but my genes which
cause this phenotype also caused this to
just happen in the world yeah so we're
going to extend our definition of the
world word phenotype to the thing that
the neural network
produces I just painted a regular
pattern out into the world you are
painting patterns out into the world as
I speak this neural network is going to
do exactly the same thing yeah okay we
got five minutes left so let's start in
on this I'm going to draw for a little
bit
here okay that's
better in this particular particular
cppn it has two input neurons and we so
we need two numbers that we need to plug
into this neural network so far in this
course we've been talking about sensor
values arriving at the input layer this
is a little bit different we want this
neural network for now to paint a
regular pattern into space that's what
we want the neural network to do the
cppn to do we're going to take this cppn
and we're going to visit the origin in a
two-dimensional space we're going to
take this position which is0
0 and we're going to plug that value
into this
cppn from the point of view of this of
the neural network it's just received
some input so as usual we propagate that
input those input values down to the
output layer in the way we always do
there's nothing new here here in this
cartoon example we have one output
neuron the floating point value that we
get back from that one output
neuron what do you think we do with that
floating point
value we're painting a regular pattern
we're painting a pattern into this
two-dimensional space we've got this
floating Point
number any ideas
we're going to treat this floating point
value as the amount of ink to place here
the cppn is telling us put if the value
here is 0.7 put 0.7 of ink here we're
going to take the same cppn we haven't
changed the cppn yet no no Evolution no
mutation no recombination we're going to
move to a new
position an X of 0.1 one and a y of zero
here's X here's
y we're going to take
.1 and
zero plug that back into the input layer
of the
cppn propagate those two input numbers
down to the output neuron and now we get
a value of 0.6
here in this second evaluation of the
cppn what do we do at this position
we got a value of 0.6
now what is the cppn telling us to
do
draw put a little bit less ink here
visit this position 0.5 let's say visit
this position the cppn outputs
0.4 we visit uh 0 0.1 feed that into the
cppn paint paint paint paint paint we
visit each point in this two-dimensional
space and this cppn will paint some
pattern into space so far so good seems
like kind of an odd thing for a neural
network to
do I think we will pause here for today
you have a quiz due tonight undergrads
you're working on assignment 9 grads
you're working on D4 see you on Thursday
St